So, you're going!
Good.
I'm glad you changed your mind.
After all, it's an official award.
There's a prestige in getting it.
I don't care about the award.
I just want to get away
from all the problems for a day.
In a way, it's good
I couldn't get on the plane.
If you'd decided
earlier, you could
have got a whole
coupé to yourself.
Now, you'll have to share.
- Makes no difference.
I'll just take some
sleeping pills and sleep.
I won't even notice if
anybody's there or not.
Shall I send a telegram to Delhi
so that they meet you?
Three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, ten.
A telegram won't reach there.
Call them.
Call Sunil as well. 22464.
Oh no! Even 180 is engaged.
What are they saying about the film?
This is only the second week.
It ought to be clear by now.
End of the month.
People don't have a lot of money.
I never heard such things before.
Why this time?
What is good in that film,
except you?
I'm in it. Isn't that enough?
Not enough, I'm afraid.
Times have changed.
Nonsense!
Stupid public!
Whimsical. Wipe 'em all out.
Bravo! And what would you eat then?
Boiled fish and rice from that place
we used to go to.
That's very difficult, brother.
Even I need the best Darjeeling tea
with my breakfast.
And I'm only a satellite.
Read the last section
in the third column.
Hello? Trunk call.
4 5...
But how did this...?
How long?
- Just five minutes.
Come on.
Are you going to Delhi?
- Looks like it.
Very lucky. I could have missed you.
Would you like anything besides tea?
- No.
Banana?
- Only tea.
I bet Tarak Chatterjee
is behind this. How dare he!
Call Phani and tell him
I'm sorry. I have to go.
I'll book 16th for him.
And Fortune Films?
- To heck with them.
No. I shall have to deal with them.
Now, sir, let's just
finish my business.
What? A contract?
What does the almanac say?
Is it a good day for contracts?
Yes! Most auspicious!
But my almanac says the opposite,
Mr Hiralal.
The opposite? What almanac?
It says, good for travel,
but bad for contracts.
You're joking.
Do you read the newspaper?
- Newspaper?
Apart from the share market?
- I haven't yet read today's.
Then you don't know the news.
- What news?
The night before last,
at a certain club,
in a state of slight inebriation,
I thrashed a certain gentleman.
Thrashed?
- I mean, the old one-two.
One two...?
I beat him up, understand?
- Oh, beat him up!
Yes!
The gentleman
insulted me.
- Really?
And he did that
in front of some ladies.
- Oh my God!
You realise in the circumstances
this couldn't be tolerated.
Of course, not! Of course, not.
But that gentleman was not aware
that I had special aptitude
for one particular role.
- Right.
And that role
is of a pugilist.
- A pugi...?
I mean, I gave him one.
Oh, good! Good!
Although, if one drinks too much,
it is tough to aim right.
But it stopped the gentleman
from being clever.
Right, right!
You did the right thing.
But, in spite of our
best efforts to hush it up,
it came out today in two papers.
So what, Mr Mukherjee?
Nothing, Mr Hiralal.
It's just that...
I don't feel like
signing any contracts today.
But it was all settled.
Not in the mood. Let it wait.
But I brought you an advance.
I'll be back on Wednesday.
We'll discuss it then.
Please hold on. He's coming.
Who is it?
- Your leading lady.
Yes?
Are you going to Delhi?
- Yes.
By train?
- By train, yes.
Should I come to the station?
- I'd rather you didn't.
You misunderstood me, Arindam.
- Probably not.
But I can explain everything.
- It won't be necessary.
Why are you behaving like this?
- It isn't without good reason.
What reason?
Tell me, Arindam, please!
I don't have time for that.
I'm going.
Bye.
Up, you go!
Will she need anything special?
If you could arrange
for some chicken stew...
Chicken stew!
Dad, give me my book
from your bag, please.
Sure. But don't strain
your eyes too much with reading.
Will you have lunch in
your coupé, Sir?
What? - Will you have lunch
in your coupé?
They'll have it here.
I'll go to the dining car.
Is Mr Bose travelling by this train?
Mr Bose...?
- Haren Bose.
Oh yes. He's in compartment D
with his family.
Do you still have doubts?
You never know.
He may have changed his plans.
He's such a busy man...
I'd be glad if he did.
- What?
I don't like mixing work
with holidays.
Do you know how much they spend
on advertising?
This upper seat is yours!
Thank you.
- I'm so sorry.
Porter, bring the bags carefully.
Rs 500,000!
Do you get it?
If I get him my entire work...
Arindam!
Who?
- Arindam Mukherjee!
'It will leave at 11:05 am.'
'Platform number 8...'
If the coupé is inconvenient,
there's room in a four
berth compartment.
Why inconvenient?
Well, your companion
would be Mr Aghore Chatterjee.
My God! He wants to wipe out
the whole film industry.
Oh, he's the one who writes
letters to The Statesman!
Yes. He got a bit worried
when he heard that you would be...
Let's go and see him, anyway.
Sir, this is Mr Chatterjee.
Hello.
So, you're the film star?
- Yes, sir.
I never go to the
cinema on principle.
In 1942, my friend
had forced me to watch
'How Green Was My Valley.'
That's a good film!
But as a rule, films are bad!
But why blame us poor actors?
Do you drink?
Well, yes, a little.
Yes. Film actors drink a lot.
That's because...
It shows a lack of decency
and lack of discipline.
Are you going to drink
on this journey?
Well, yes, it's my second nature.
Well, then, I'm obliged to tell you
that the smell of alcohol
makes me nauseous.
And my...
I am 79. And as such I expect
some consideration
from my fellow passengers.
Don't you worry, sir.
I'm in another compartment.
I have heard of you,
read your letters,
so I just came to pay my respects.
- Oh, I see!
Okay, bye, then.
- Bye.
You've got a lower berth.
It might be a little uncomfortable.
No, this is fine!
- Very nice.
Wow! It's brand new!
- Come on.
Mom!
- Quiet!
100.4.
They should have some sense.
Foisting him on us!
What's so bad about it?
- Didn't you read the news today?
Yes, but he's going to
Delhi for the award.
Scandalous!
Listen! Open this bottle.
Hey!
Arindam, bye!
Three cheers for
Arindam Mukhopadhyay!
In Delhi, I'll show
you the Jama Masjid.
And...
- And the Qutab Minar too.
And?
Thank you.
- Hello.
Darn it!
Disgusting!
Isn't there some boy or attendant?
Call him for help.
What is it? A screw cap?
God knows why they have to...
May I try?
All right, but opening it...
Here you are.
Thanks.
It isn't so easy
if your palms are sweating.
Yes, perspiration...
I want to congratulate you.
Me?
For opening the screw cap?
- No.
You're going to Delhi
to get an award, right?
I see. Thanks.
What's wrong with her? - She has
been feverish for a month now.
Her temperature is still above 100.
She's a great fan of yours.
- Is that so?
We haven't watched
your new film yet.
Just as well.
- Don't say that!
We never miss a film of yours.
This time, we couldn't watch it
due to her illness.
Your film released
right after she fell ill.
Do you film people
have import export problems too?
Absolutely, just like
any other industry.
I've noticed that the Japanese
film industry is growing rapidly.
America, of course,
was always well ahead.
But, this time, I noticed a slump.
The studios are all idle.
Or they are making films
for television.
It made me feel sad.
After all, there is nothing
to beat American movies.
Yes, very true. After all,
I've learnt acting from them.
Don't mind my saying this, sir,
but we haven't yet learnt
to care about quality.
Our motto seems to be,
'Produce more and produce rubbish!'
Right.
That's why family
planning is so important.
Oh my!
You publish this magazine
on your own!
Not quite.
There are two others helping me.
But it's my initiative.
All written by women!
Look at all this.
I go through the proof.
There's no shortage of material.
Do you make a profit?
We could, with a few
more advertisements.
You know a lot of people.
Why don't you help her out?
You could begin by taking
a subscription for your wife.
Gladly! What's the damage?
- Ten rupees a year.
In these matters,
I have no hesitation.
Just look at him!
Who should I write the receipt to?
- Shefalika Devi.
You go from house to house
collecting subscriptions.
You'll find lots of
husbands like mine,
who'll take one look at you
and pay up ten rupees.
I'm going to Delhi to
arrange some grant.
I have an uncle, who works
in the Education Ministry.
I hope you don't mind me calling you
by your first name.
Not at all.
Thank you.
Hey!
So, this is your lucky day!
Isn't that true?
Arindam Mukherjee, isn't it?
- Yes.
Don't you think he's wonderful?
I haven't seen many of his films,
but he is a good actor.
Hey! There was something about him
in today's newspaper.
He got into a fight with somebody.
Speak a bit louder
and he might hear you.
I'll just get an autograph
for Mithu.
Excuse me.
Can I have an autograph?
- Oh, yes. Certainly!
For a cousin of mine.
I see.
I didn't think you were
the autograph-hunting type.
I don't suppose you have the bad
habit of watching Bengali films.
Not many.
- You don't like them, do you?
Too removed from reality!
You're right.
Educated young ladies
shouldn't burst into
a song of separation.
And heroes shouldn't be so God-like.
I'll take your leave. Thank you.
I wonder what he thought.
Why?
I never can keep the truth
to myself. - What truth?
Did you watch 'Jay Parajay'?
Yes! He played tennis in it, right?
He doesn't just play,
he's the champion!
Tennis champion, swimming champion,
dancer, singer, leading progressive,
topper in his masters, great lover!
Is that believable?
She thinks so.
- I don't care what you say.
I don't think about all that
when I watch him.
I'll tell you what it is,
he's a modern Casanova.
And all these ladies
are his admirers.
Waiter!
- No, let me pay.
No, you mustn't.
Molly, he's gone to the
dining car. I'll go too.
What about me?
You come too, but not just yet.
It takes time to hook a big fish.
- All right.
Hey, you're angry!
- I told you it's all right.
Listen, if we can convince him,
next birthday you get a...
Pearl necklace!
Yes. Done.
Darjeeling right next door
and you don't serve tea!
You will be served tea
at the tea time, sir.
If you want a cold drink now...
Well, can I have a beer?
We can't serve alcohol...
Well, can I have a Coke then?
A Coke?
Coca Cola!
- Coca Cola!
Coca Cola! Yes, sir.
- One for me too.
May I join you, sir?
Have a seat.
I don't think we know...
- But I know you. Mr Bose, right?
Good heavens!
But I'm not a film star!
I'm more likely to have heard of you
than of any film star.
Really?
Pritish...
Rhymes with British.
Spectrum Publicity.
Why 'Spectrum' '?
That indicates the range
of our interest.
That may be so,
but it does not indicate
your speciality.
You know Mr Nandi, don't you?
The owner of Bengal Biscuits.
Who? Jitesh?
He was my classmate.
We handle
their account.
You may ask him about us.
Jitesh was a good hockey player.
I can show you samples of our work.
Very modern and effective.
After all, you know
what's being done abroad.
You have been all around the world.
By the grace of God, yes.
Why just God?
Thanks to your abilities too.
I know that's the
wisdom of our times.
God does nothing.
Man does everything.
Oh no! Only the extreme leftists
would say that.
You keep to the right, I presume.
Not quite.
You see, these days, every
young man leans a bit to the left.
I don't like extreme conservatism.
- Certainly not.
But in our profession,
we depend on private enterprise.
They have excelled with these
trains. Something to be proud of.
Yes, sir.
Did you read it?
He doesn't seem to have had
much of a struggle.
He is in one now.
What to do with so much money?
I'm sure finding a solution
is a huge struggle.
I suppose, it's mainly
a matter of luck.
80% of it.
Hey, I have an idea.
Talk to the man
and write an article.
Then publish it in your magazine.
It will increase your sales!
- Why don't you admit it?
You want to find out more behind
the story in the newspaper today.
You don't know anything!
Okay, you tell me.
Isn't that a good idea?
Wasn't my advice good for you?
I am thinking of keeping films
of my paper.
- That's silly.
You can't ignore film
related news these days.
So I guessed from readers' letters.
That settles it, then. Go on.
Go on.
Wait, I'll toss and decide.
Here you are.
You toss. If it's heads, I'll go.
What is it this time?
Another cousin?
Do you mind if I
bother you once again?
Bother me?
But if you mind, you may refuse me.
Object to being bothered?
Well, actually...
I just wanted to ask you
some questions. - My God!
You're not a journalist, are you?
- No.
I edit
a women's magazine.
'Aadhunik'. Please have a seat.
Nothing about films
in here, I suppose.
I was hoping to put that right
by interviewing you.
Now that I've got you here...
- Got me?
I mean, considering you're here
and being the most
popular star these days.
Listen, my life story has been
published so many times
that apart from
a few people like you,
everybody knows everything.
I think I know as much
as everybody else does.
Really?
- For instance
you lost your parents when
you were very young.
You grew up with your uncle,
graduated from Bangabasi college,
worked in an office for some time
and then made your first film
when you were 27.
You quickly found fame,
name, money and...
And?
- You're still not married.
Neither are you.
Unless, you're one of those modern
women, who don't apply vermilion.
No. I'm not married.
But, you know,
what they're writing
about you isn't very interesting.
Really?
What, according to you,
would be interesting?
For instance, the first question
that comes to mind is,
how does it clearly
feel to be so famous?
Feels fine. Splendid!
But
although, you have
everything in abundance,
don't you feel there's some void,
like something is missing?
Don't you have any regrets?
Why do you want to know?
What if I tell you everything
and ruin my fan following?
Look, Miss Sengupta,
it isn't good for
us to talk too much.
We live in a world of shadows,
so it's best not to show the public
too much of our flesh and blood.
Do you understand?
I can see you don't.
Perhaps, I do.
- What do you see?
That you must stay a hero
in the eyes of the public.
- Exactly.
So...
- So, there is nothing to discuss.
So, goodbye. - Wait.
Let me offer you a cold drink,
or you will tell your readers
that I have no manners.
And even that might
hurt your fan following?
Certainly! You know so little
about this business.
All you do is watch films in
an air-conditioned room and say.
Rubbish!
- True.
But, I never realised that
your fan following was so fragile.
Otherwise, I'd never
have bothered you.
Miss Sengupta, you will
make progress in life.
I hope so.
But I'll have to put in
a lot of hard work.
And what about us?
We just lean back in our cosy chairs
and rise to the top, right?
Maybe! Goodbye.
And you don't want
anything cold to drink?
No. Thank you.
What happened? Did he tell
you anything? - No.
Oh my! Why not?
Do you know what they remind me of?
There are some plants
that you need to keep
in green houses, or they die.
He is just like that.
Satisfied?
What's your name?
- Rita.
Is that so?
- And yours?
My name is Arindam Mukherjee.
Sir.
Mr Aghore Chatterjee
would like a word with you.
Again? Why?
It's about the piece about you
in the newspaper today.
What piece?
- About you going to Delhi!
I see.
- Yes. If you please...
Okay.
Did you want to see me?
So, you're going to Delhi
to receive an award.
Yes, but that's because they don't
know the inside stories about us.
Come inside.
May I come in?
- Sit down.
I'm afraid.
- Afraid of what?
I have all kinds of vices.
What if you get some infection
or something?
What vices?
It is never too late to reform.
Have a chocolate?
- No, thanks.
Do you have a family?
- No.
Didn't you get married?
Are you talking
about legal marriage?
What other kind of marriage is there
in the civilised society?
No, sir. Then I'm a bachelor.
And why do you
have to take to drink?
What do you get by drinking?
If you've never tried it,
how can I explain it to you?
I'm no good with words,
but I can act it out for you.
- Look here, young man!
Without moral sense,
no one becomes great.
Especially today, in India,
we need to be strict
about such things.
Oh my God!
I'll go, sir.
I have to see about an injection.
An injection?
Cocaine!
- What nonsense!
Scoundrel!
Have some.
- No, mom. Not now!
Come on, take it.
Have it.
I never thought I'd
see you so up close.
I saw you at New Market the other
day. You were buying a shirt.
That's possible.
You must have a lot of trouble
walking on the streets.
Yes, that is true.
Mom!
What can you do here?
Where's the imagination?
In England, you can spend hours
in front of a shop window.
What superb displays!
Sir, West Bengal
is still not like that.
How many people appreciate
what's good?
If we got a client like you,
why wouldn't we do good things?
You know what I mean.
I just don't think you can do it.
I'm very fussy...
Oh, my wife. Mr Bose.
- Have a seat.
What would you like?
Waiter!
Do you help your
husband in his work?
She is the perfect housewife.
I see.
These days, young girls
are working in every field.
I think it's a good idea.
Besides, women have
a natural sense of beauty.
I think that could be very useful
for the advertising profession.
Have you ever thought
of that, Mr Sarkar?
No, I can't say I have.
Don't you want to work?
You do!
- Yes, I do.
But you can't dare to say that
to your husband, right?
Nowadays, Bengali women are
hunting tigers, flying aeroplanes,
climbing mountains,
becoming barristers.
Why won't you be able to work in
an ordinary advertising agency?
That doesn't even make sense.
Mr Sarkar, what do you say?
'Shankar! Shankar! Help!'
'Help, Shankar!'
What's the matter?
Move from the way.
I'm sorry, madam.
Why did you leave?
I felt like it.
You felt like it!
Without a word of explanation!
Don't you know why I left?
- Why?
Didn't you notice the way
he was staring at me?
That's not an...
What's wrong if the man like you?
Molly, it's almost in the bag.
I just need your help.
- My help?
Weren't you listening? He gave us
his address, invited us to tea.
What about it?
Don't you understand?
- No. You tell me.
Molly, you have been
a stage actress.
Now you have to act a bit
in real life. - Acting?
All you have to be
is a little nice to him.
Give him some company.
Smile sweetly, talk softly.
I see.
Won't you do that much
for your husband?
Please don't misunderstand me,
Molly! For heaven's sake!
I don't like all this.
Why are you taking
this so seriously?
Molly, this a kind of game.
A strategy! - I understand.
What happened? Where are you going?
Molly! Molly!
Molly!
Hot tea!
Give me some tea!
I'll be safe if I sit with you.
You have no interest
in my profession.
Tell me.
Do you know anything about dreams?
Dreams?
- Yes.
I know the usual things,
like anybody else.
What?
It is said that all your
sub-conscious desires,
beliefs and fears
often constitute dreams.
Did you fall asleep
and dream about something?
Yes, I did.
I saw
that I was sinking
into a pile of money.
Shankar could have pulled me out.
But he didn't.
And...
I...
It was terrible.
Who is Shankar?
Some relative?
No, he is
a friend from my neighbourhood.
He used to say, 'Do anything else,
but don't join the cinema.'
Old fashioned?
Not really, except
when it came to films.
But he had a reason for that.
We had a club in the neighbourhood
that performed plays.
Shankar was the leading light,
a real director.
But I was always the hero.
And all the while, you were
secretly planning to go into films?
I was egged on.
There was a boy called Jyoti.
Well, he's still there, my manager.
He had connections
with people in films.
Then one day, Jyoti
came to me with an offer.
A film on 'Devi Chaudhurani'.
Mukunda Lahiri was to play the
father and that's what attracted me.
It was Durga Puja
and we were rehearsing
like mad for a play.
It was then that somebody went
and complained to Shankar about me.
'No, no! I want the truth!'
'What's going on?
Is it some kind of joke?'
'Get out! Get out, all of you!'
'What?'
'Are you trying
to sabotage my play?'
'What are you trying to do?'
'You're losing your temper
for nothing, Shankar.'
'I'll decide that.'
'So, you want to become a film star!
Or a comet with a tail!'
'You know everything already.'
'But you didn't tell me anything.
I want to hear it from you.'
'Jyoti brought a film offer.'
'What film?'
'Devi Chaudhurani.
- What role?'
'The lead role.'
'Brajeshwar! That nonentity!'
'Nothing is decided yet.
They just want a screen test.'
'What did you say?
- I haven't said anything yet.'
'I'll tell you.'
'You can't do it.'
'I won't if you don't agree.'
'Although, I wasn't planning on
jeopardising the play for the film.'
'Listen, Arindam.'
'I know there's a lot
of glamour in films, '
'but they have no
connection with art.'
'An actor in films'
'don't have an important
contribution. Impossible!'
'I know this for certain.'
'I've done a detailed study of it.'
'A film actor is
nothing but a puppet.'
'A doll.'
'A puppet in the
hands of the director, '
'a puppet in the hands
of the cameraman, '
'and the sound recordist.'
'And the person, who edits
the film into its final form...'
'A puppet in his hands too!'
'And there's one more thing.'
'The main source of inspiration
for an actor are the spectators.'
'All those dark heads you see,
they give you the energy.'
'You draw inspiration from them.
If you take that away, '
'where's the real thrill of acting?
'Is it there in films?'
'What are you actually
looking for? Money?'
'I'm not saying
that you won't be successful.'
'You've got the looks, the voice,
you may become successful.'
'But there's one thing
you must know.'
'There's a nasty side to films,
the business side, '
'nothing but supply and demand.'
'You have two hits in a row and
you'll find yourself at the top.'
'Then when number three flops
and number four flops, '
'you'll find the ladder you
climbed up has been taken away.'
'Then somebody gives you a push'
'and you fall smack on your face.'
'Then you're finished
for all times.'
That's who Shankar was.
And he wasn't completely
wrong, either.
But it doesn't apply
in your case, does it?
On 'Ashtami' during Durga Puja
that year, we performed the play.
Two days later, we were to
immerse the idol of the Goddess.
Our image was
in the traditional style.
Shankar used to say that
without proper decoration
and those huge eyes,
one doesn't have the right feeling.
'Glory to Goddess Durga!'
'Move! Shankar!'
'Shankar!'
'He is no more.'
That young man
dropped dead before my eyes.
Thrombosis.
I saw both my parents
die while I was a child.
I had carried many dead bodies
of relatives and others.
It had made me kind of
callous about death.
But I wasn't able
to accept Shankar's death.
He was so full of life!
How could he die so suddenly?
But do you know what's strange?
When the dead body
was being cremated,
I felt as if something was...
Something was changing within me.
'Jyoti.'
'Yes?'
'Sit.'
'What?'
'Do you believe in reincarnation?
- Whose reincarnation?'
'Human rebirth.
Yours, for instance.'
'Even if I'm reborn, how
do I know it's me?'
'Jyoti Banerjee won't be reborn
as Jyoti Banerjee.'
'Not many can remember
their previous lives anyway.'
'So, it's not about believing
or not believing.'
'Exactly! - This is the age
of Marx and Freud.'
'No rebirth, no providence.'
'I know. One life, one chance...'
'What's on your mind?'
'What are you thinking?'
'Do you also believe
that film actors are all puppets?'
'Brando, Bogart, Paul Muni...
Are they all puppets?'
'As a man, you earn
350 rupees a month, '
'with an annual
increment of ten rupees.'
'But as a successful puppet,
you get 30,000 rupees per film.'
'They've tested two boys,
but haven't taken them.'
'No, Shankar must be wrong.
Must be wrong!'
'If you agree,
I won't feel humiliated.'
'If it was ancient times,
I'd be afraid.'
'Afraid of what?'
'Shankar's curse.'
I decided then, on the spot.
Wow!
You look beautiful
without your glasses.
You must be
a bit scared by all this.
Why?
Right after his death, I...
Well, that's real life for you.
That's what Bengali films
don't have, according to you.
Bardhaman.
Perhaps, I shouldn't stay here.
Why not?
Well, at the station...
Look, they've recognised you.
Is that so strange?
No, but... again! Oh my God!
You know,
it's a red-letter day for them.
I know.
But I'm not used to all this.
Do you know what they're thinking?
They think that I'm shooting a film
and you're my co-actor. - Oh no!
What are you saying?
Why? Are you ashamed of my company?
That is not it.
Take the hand away from your face,
or they'll bother you more.
Relax! Be normal!
Keep talking.
- Impossible.
Then, may I talk?
- Go on.
Why haven't you got married?
Have you ever done any acting?
Would you like to go into films?
You...
Let me ask the questions.
Go on.
Do you...
Do you remember
your first day's shooting?
Who ever
forgets it?
The one I am reminded of the most
is Mukunda Lahiri.
'Who is it there?'
'My name is Arindam Mukhopadhyay.'
'Oh! So you'll play Brajeshwar!'
'Yes, sir.'
'Is this your first film?
- Yes, sir.'
'Do you mind if I call
you Brajeshwar? - No.'
'It's a habit to call my co-actors
by their character names.'
'I see.'
'I think you'll find it
helpful because, '
'when we do a scene, '
'reactions will come more
naturally. - I understand.'
'But don't you call me father.'
'That'll be a bit too much.'
'Okay?'
'And smoking in front of me...
Hey! Idiot!'
'You do that again and I'll
tear off your real moustache!'
'Did it hurt?
- Stiff neck.'
'I told the servant
to put the pillows in the sun.'
'Would you like a massage?'
'Massage?
- It'll get rid of your pain.'
'Jack of all trades!'
'Not quite.
But this is one of them.'
'How long will it take?
- Not long.'
'Come on, we'll try the massage.'
I learnt it from Shankar.
It never failed.
During the shooting,
I witnessed his terror.
Everyone, including the director,
was scared of him.
'Why is it so hot?
Who is standing before the fan?'
'Remember, '
'the actor is the only
indispensable person on the set.'
'No one can replace him.'
'There you are! Pick it up.'
'Where's Brajeshwar?'
'Brajeshwar!
- Here, sir.'
'Listen, '
'I don't learn lines
as they are written.'
'Sometimes, I improvise, as
long as the sense remains the same.'
'You will have to watch
for the cues.'
'Right, sir.
- Come on, let's start. One minute.'
'This is your first position.
- Okay.'
'When I say action, you'll move
forward and address your father.'
'Then he will react.
- Right.'
'After that, you stand on the
chalk mark and touch his feet.'
'Then you'll talk. Okay?'
'Yes.
- Action. Monitor.'
'Monitor! Come on!'
'Sounds on!'
'Ready, Mukunda?'
'Action!'
'Father.'
'Come in.'
'Your delay was causing me
great anxiety.'
'I had never imagined'
'that in my old age, '
'I would face such tribulation.'
'I can find no fault
with my actions.'
'I've thought a lot about it, '
'but can't think of anything wrong
that I've done.'
'So, '
'how do I explain it'
'if not as the fate mocking me?'
'I suppose you know that
through the grace of Teri Singh, '
'a warrant has been
issued for my arrest.'
'I know.'
'So, you realise, '
'that money is
now the most pressing need.'
'Have you done anything about it?'
'Father-in-law won't
give anything, '
'but I've found another way.'
'Is that a special style'
'or is it copied from Hollywood?'
'What are you muttering for?'
'Doesn't the situation'
'call for a low voice?
- Low voice?'
'Bankim wrote that in those days,
young men didn't raise'
'their voices
in front of their fathers.'
'Maybe. But your way of speaking
must go with mine.'
'If we speak in absolutely different
manners, how will they mix?'
'You cannot ignore
voice modulations.'
'You have worked on stage.
Haven't you learnt voice...'
He didn't even hesitate to insult me
before so many people.
But he was a senior actor,
so I kept quiet.
Although, I knew that his style
of acting was wrong.
It was old style.
It didn't work in modern times.
Wow! You had
so much confidence even then!
I had, but...
I felt something was wrong
before the film was released.
Wrong?
Before then,
I didn't have any bad habits.
But
that day...
'Here.'
'Take it.
It will steady your nerves.'
'You know what?
- What?'
'There's a reason'
'for my nervousness.'
'Don't I know it!
The film will release tomorrow.'
'Then?'
'My work is'
'not good.'
'Not good?'
'Wrong! Too many things went wrong.'
'Haven't I seen the film?
Doesn't my opinion count?'
'No, it doesn't.'
'It is worth nothing.
- Nothing?'
'Nothing!'
'You don't understand.
You don't know.'
'No one but me knows.'
'An actor'
'knows.'
'When I was performing,
I felt I was going wrong.'
'The fault is not mine.'
'And yet, in some way, it is.'
'You don't understand.
You're blind.'
'All my scenes with Mukunda Lahiri
were spoiled.'
'But that's only four scenes.'
'In the entire movie,
just four scenes!'
'But why even four?'
'It could have been perfect,
my first film.'
'But that man...'
'That man tried to trip me over.'
'You're being too fussy.'
'Do you know why he did that?'
'He would've been caught
in the wrong otherwise.'
'He had understood
that I had prepared for my role.'
'And he couldn't'
'tolerate that.'
'Do you know how these people are?'
'They don't care about
the characters they play.'
'Give him any part and he churns out
the same character.'
'The same voice, same style
of acting, same mannerisms.'
'And the public just laps it up.'
'Mukunda Lahiri! What acting!
What a voice!'
'No, no, no!'
'This isn't right. Loud acting
doesn't work in front of camera.'
'You overdo it just a bit
and it comes out 10 times worse.'
'My style of acting would
have shown up his weaknesses.'
'He could see that.
And because I was new, '
'he could shout at me
and shut me up.'
'Okay.'
'Arindam, it's a good sign
that you're being so fastidious.'
'It means you'll go a long way.'
'I will. I'll make sure of that.
'I will go to the top!'
'The top!'
I went to see the first
showing of the film,
and you know,
I couldn't stand more
than half of it.
But do you know how many autographs
I signed afterwards?
Feels good, doesn't it?
- Marvellous!
But tell me,
up to now, haven't
any of your films...
Been a flop, you mean?
- Yes.
No. Not yet.
Then, what were you sighing about?
You see, I know what can happen
if three films flop in a row.
Who did it happen to?
One day, three to four years ago,
I was already famous.
I had just moved into my new house.
11 o'clock at night,
I was going to
bed, we were shooting
the next day.
Suddenly, the butler informed me,
a gentleman wanted to see me.
Very urgent.
So I went.
'Remember me?'
'What are you saying, Mukunda?'
'A lot of people'
'have forgotten me.'
'Well?'
'Won't you offer me'
'some of your...'
'Ramsharan.'
'Yes, sir?'
'What will you have?'
'I don't want anything.'
'My soul does.'
'What will your soul have?'
'Whisky?'
'Whisky.'
'What about you?'
'I've got a shoot tomorrow.'
'A shoot.'
'The word has a'
'familiar ring.'
'The hero...'
'Time to change.'
'My first film.'
'Kapal Kundala.'
'At first, I couldn't get my grip.'
'Then came the talkies.'
'Voice!'
'I went to the summit.'
'Twenty years!'
'Then, '
'one day suddenly, '
'I felt myself slipping.'
'Slipping...'
'I never understood
how it happened.'
'Then I noticed, '
'the throne is there.'
'I have been overthrown.'
'What are you working on now?'
'The usual.'
'Good whisky.'
'Is the casting done?'
'I don't know.'
'Your word counts these days.'
'Couldn't you find me anything?'
'Doorman... Anything!'
'You could, couldn't you?'
'Such stagnation!'
'I...'
'Four years, no work!'
'I had two policies.'
'Both lapsed.'
'Will you be able to work?'
'You don't look too well, Mukunda.'
'Voice!'
'Voice...'
'Just voice isn't enough.
You know that.'
'So, isn't it true'
'that men improve with age?'
Did you help him get a role?
How could I?
The man took morphine all day.
How would he have acted?
So, you had your revenge in the end.
Could you forget
how he behaved on that first day?
Wow!
I see you're quite a
formidable young lady.
The scenery has changed
after we crossed the Bengal border.
Everything is dry in this part.
Just like you.
Like me?
Aren't you hard too?
Hard and ruthless?
Didn't you sweep aside
everything that got in your way?
You know,
the voice of conscience in plays?
That's the role for you.
Is that bad?
No, but a terrible nuisance.
I wish I could sweep it away...
- What are you saying?
Isn't that what makes you human?
Yes, but...
Do you know what's worse?
When people very close to you...
For example, Biresh...
Biresh and I studied together
for 10 years.
We went to the same school
and college.
He was in politics
and I was unemployed.
So, I used to accompany him.
'The company
is exploiting workers...'
Biresh would deliver speeches
in front of the factory gates
and I would stand away from him
and memorise the dialogues
of my next play.
They were happy days
we had together.
'Do you know why I bring you here?'
'You bring me!
I come here because I want to.'
'Right, but being here
isn't enough.'
'I want you to be conscious
about a few things.'
'The trouble with you'
'is that your plays and theatre'
'keep you in a world
of make-believe'
'that doesn't allow you to know
the real world.'
'Is that so?
- Yes.'
'If you could feel these issues,
it would be better.'
'What do you mean by better?'
'With your voice and personality,
if you could stand up and speak...'
'In front of the factory gate?
- Yes.'
'And you'd be a labour leader on
the stage. So, you'd be acting too.'
'The play would be ruined.'
'The company has fired
people illegally.'
'As long as it doesn't
reinstate workers, '
'we will...'
- Once, during a strike,
Biresh was giving his usual speech
and I was pacing nearby.
'Long live the worker's strike!'
'Long live revolution!'
Suddenly, I heard something and
turned to see a group of people,
obviously, hired to cause damage,
were walking towards the meeting.
A police van was right behind them.
I knew that a chaos
was going to ensue.
Usually, I don't like chaos.
'Catch a fish without getting
your hands wet, ' That's my motto.
But I don't know
what happened that day.
I jumped into the crowd
because Biresh was in trouble.
But then I was hit
on my head by a stone.
Then there was a blackout!
Later, I found out
that Biresh was arrested.
There was no clue
of him for 5 years.
Meanwhile, I started
working in films
and made a name for myself.
I even bought a flat in Ballygunge.
It was a Sunday morning.
A new film was about to be shot.
The tailor was taking measurements.
'He weaves stories.
- What's new?'
'The story of a few films...'
'Yes!'
'When is the fitting?
- Wednesday evening.'
'Why Wednesday?
Two days earlier...'
'Who's that?'
'Hey!'
'Busy?'
'No, not at all!
Come in and have a seat.'
'Wait a minute. What should we do?
- Talk to him.'
'If the clothes don't fit,
my acting suffers a lot.'
'Don't worry. They'll fit.
- You can't work in Hindi films.'
'Go and wait
in the other room for a while.'
'All right. What now?'
'One more near the window...'
'Come on, hurry up!'
'Just turn, I want a profile.
- Take it.'
'Finished? Now leave.'
'It's all right. Go now.'
'Come here.'
'Jyoti, send a cup of tea in here.'
'Come here and sit.'
'Are these photos for your fans?
- What can I say?'
'I can't displease them.
They're my public, after all.'
'So, tell me.'
'How have you been?'
'A cigarette?'
'How long has it been?'
'Almost five years, right?'
'What?'
'You've acquired
a kind of radiance.'
'The glow of success!'
'Who doesn't want success?'
'I haven't seen any of your films.
- You haven't missed much.'
'You must be doing well.
- How about you?'
'Same as always.'
'No change?'
'But you seem to be...'
'Different?'
'It seems so.'
'Change is the only
constant in the world.'
'Right?'
'But I'm not sure about
the direction of the change.'
'How does it matter?
Come, have some tea.'
'You have a car now, don't you?'
'A small car, not big.'
'Why?
- Can you give me a ride?'
'Where to?'
'You never used to ask
that question before.'
'All right.'
Even in the car, Biresh didn't
tell me where he was taking me.
And I didn't ask.
But after a few kilometres,
doubt formed in my mind.
After a few moments, I realised
that I wasn't completely wrong.
'Stop right here.'
'Long live Arindam Mukherjee!'
'Come out.'
'What happened?
- What are you planning?'
'Nothing. Just get down, stand in
front of them and say a few words.'
'Why?
- It'll cheer them up to see you.'
'They've been on strike
for 24 days.'
'They've been expecting you.
They're also your public.'
'Impossible! - What do you
mean impossible? Come on.'
'You don't get it! I can't be
involved in this. It's too risky.'
'Why can't you
understand my position?'
'Nonsense! What on earth
are you so afraid of?'
'If you want money, I can
give it to you. Any amount!'
'But this is impossible. Don't you
know I'm not what I used to be?'
'I can see you're not what you
used to be. - I just... I can't.'
'Don't you have any feelings
for these people?'
'How do feelings come into it?'
'I'm telling you,
if you want money,
I'll give it to you.
Any amount!'
'Anonymously, right?
'I know you have a lot of money.'
'Okay, I'll see you again if needed.
- I'm leaving.'
I couldn't do what Biresh wanted.
Why I couldn't...
What was I afraid of...
I can't really say.
But I understood that Biresh
didn't respect me anymore.
Do you know what I feel sometimes?
I wish,
I hadn't changed so much.
Why do you say that?
After all, you're giving pleasure
to so many people.
That's a big thing,
A good thing. Isn't it?
You couldn't have done this earlier.
It ought to give you satisfaction.
Yes, it does.
This isn't just a profession.
It's like an addiction.
Well, that's fine.
So long as the work goes all right,
you have nothing to worry about.
What makes you think I might
have something to worry about?
You have spoken about losing
your fan following so many times!
That's just a bad habit of ours.
Do you know what the trouble is?
Fan following is
a very volatile situation.
And yet they've made
you what you are.
I'm no match for you in an argument.
Because I'm not speaking dialogues.
Well, I'll leave you to
your work now and go.
Would you like some toffee?
Excuse me.
Aren't you sleepy?
Your fever has gone down.
Does your mother know?
Are you sick too?
These are sleeping pills.
But you've already been to sleep.
I want to sleep again.
Can't you sleep without pills?
What if I don't?
I'm not taking the risk.
'I want to be a film actress.'
'I see.'
'Since I'm here, you realise,
I really need it.'
'Maybe.'
'You're working in
'Maner Manush', right?
'Yes, I think so.'
'Can I have the female lead?'
'But the female lead
has been found.'
'I know.'
'Then?'
'Wouldn't I do?'
'The question does not arise now.
- Don't you have a say?'
'I do have a say.'
'Please have a seat.'
'No, thanks.'
'It's already been decided.
- Couldn't you just try?'
'Why should I? There should be
some reason for trying.'
'Why would I do that suddenly?
The actress has been chosen...'
'I have talent and ambition.'
'You know no one wants to give
a chance to newcomers.
'Is that why you are here?'
'Yes.'
'Are you trying to see
if I'll suit the role?'
'Are you'
'married?'
'Hey...'
'What happened? What's the matter?'
'What's this?'
'Acting!'
'No need for glycerine.'
'I've read the book.'
'I think the part suits
me better than Mandira.'
'I think you can see that too.'
'May I know your name?'
'Why just the name?
The address and phone number...'
'That's not necessary.
- Why?'
'Just the name. I'm intrigued.'
'I must include this curious episode
in my autobiography.'
'Promila.
- Promila what?'
'Chatterjee.'
'Miss.
- I see.'
'Good bye.'
'It was nice meeting you.'
'What's the matter now?'
'You know, '
'you've made so many films
with so many love scenes, '
'but when a woman comes to see you
at your house, you're nervous!'
'Nervous?
- Certainly.'
'On the contrary,
self controlled, civilised'
'and well bred.'
'You look much better
off the screen.'
'I think you use too much make-up.
- Listen, Miss Chatterjee, '
'I'm not used to staying up
this late.'
'I am.'
'But why should I do'
'what you wish?'
'Why don't you come back tomorrow?'
'Tomorrow night?'
Wow! You're a terrific player,
Mr Bose.
I used to be quite good.
I studied master games and all that.
Now I'm out of practice.
If that's out of practice,
what do you think of the rest of us?
Alekhine, Capablanca,
Botvinnik...
I suppose you know that the game
was invented in India.
Then you must admit,
India does have some...
Not now, nothing at all.
Nothing at all.
The queen in the charming white!
Where has she gone?
- Who? Molly?
Molly, Jolly,
Polly, Golly!
By Golly, you are lucky,
Mr Banerjee.
No, it's Sarkar.
Nice. Sarkar. You're lucky.
That's why, I'm losing.
You are slow,
Mr Spectrum Advertising. - No!
Not that one. It would be checkmate.
Mate?
Your mate is great!
'Where is Brajeshwar? Brajeshwar!'
'Action!'
'Long live the worker's union!'
'The train will leave
from platform number 8'
'at 12:35 pm.'
'Arindam!'
'Promila!'
'Are you looking for my wife?'
'Your wife?'
'Don't you know? Who do you think
you're fooling, scoundrel?'
'Cut!'
What happened to you?
Are you feeling well?
Your dinner is here, sir.
Mr Mukherjee,
I have a small request.
Yes?
I want to work in films.
Can you help me?
I used to act in school plays.
I can sing and dance.
You're travelling with your husband,
aren't you?
Aren't you?
- I am.
Tell him I want to see him.
Then we'll see.
All right?
Where have you been all this time?
I was just...
- I was just telling your husband
you must come and see us in Delhi.
You ought to mix more with people,
don't you think?
Maybe. Excuse me.
Sir?
I'll think about your proposal.
I can't commit myself just now.
I'll let you know later.
Okay, sir...
Won't you have your dinner now?
Shall I ask them to send it?
- No.
Molly, you misunderstand me.
I want to make an
arrangement with you.
What arrangement?
I'll do what you want.
I'll be nice to him.
If that helps you, fine.
But you must do something for me
in exchange.
What?
Tell Arindam Mukherjee that you
don't object to my being in films.
You'll have your business
and I'll have my job.
You want to
be in films!
Yes, I do.
Impossible!
Hello, there!
Did you call, sir?
What do you
call that coach? Sitting...?
Chair car, sir?
- That's right. Chair car.
Miss Sengupta,
fair complexion, glasses
and a pen
in her blouse here.
Do you understand?
What do you understand?
Miss Sengupta, fair complexion...
- Yes.
Glasses...
And?
And a fountain pen...
- Where?
Tucked into her blouse, sir.
- Good, good.
Tell her that I want to see her.
Hey! Hey there!
"Oh, tell me, sweetheart!"
"Why must we stay apart?"
Sir!
Miss Sengupta.
I see.
You see, I'm...
I'm drunk.
I want to
ask you some questions.
Go ahead.
There's something
about me in the newspapers today.
Did you know?
I know.
Do you know what was behind it?
No.
Don't you want to know?
Why should I?
But your
interview won't
be complete without it.
It doesn't matter.
- But I...
I must tell you.
There was
a marriage... - There's no
need to tell me, Arindam.
What do you mean no need?
I feel the need.
What need?
It's all piled up
in here.
There's nobody
I can tell it all to.
All those who flock around me now,
you know...
The moment I start slipping,
those bastards...
Let's take it that
you've told me everything.
I know all there is to know.
How could you know?
- I can guess.
Can you
guess everything?
Why not?
Can you guess why my new film
is going to flop?
Perhaps I can.
Then tell me why.
Since your heart wasn't in it,
you didn't do things properly.
Isn't that the reason?
Wow!
You're formidable!
Now do you see
the God-like hero...
I have.
That's it, then.
You can go now.
What about you?
You go first. Then I'll go.
And...
You may
write whatever you like.
Anything! I don't care!
Understand, Miss Modern Woman?
Please...
Forgive me.
I'm not feeling well.
Good morning.
- Good morning.
Aligarh?
- Nearly there.
Big headache?
- Yes.
You're in advertising, aren't you?
Yes, up to now.
Do you take on
religious organisations?
Religious organisations?
Advertising?
- Yes.
Have you heard of WWWW?
W-W... What are you saying...?
All those Ws...
Not so many. Just four.
World Wide Will Workers.
What workers?
- Will!
Don't you understand will force?
I see.
Here you are, read it.
Read this.
- I don't have my glasses on.
I'll read it later.
- I'm sorry.
Where there is will, there is way.
Be prognostic and prevent
all calamities and catastrophes.
Okay?
We believe that if a
large number of people
come together and with
full concentration,
if they will something to happen,
it certainly will.
Wars, epidemics, famines, anything
can be prognosed and prevented.
We have branches
in all the big cities of India.
Now our plan is to further explore
and expand.
But before that,
we want some publicity
and an emblem.
WWWW.
Have you prepared a budget?
Budget? Yes.
Rs 30,000.
I see.
I want to discuss that with you.
You're going to Delhi,
aren't you?
Will you give me your address?
Let me get down first.
My head is still...
Let me get down.
- Sure.
Good morning.
What?
- Good morning.
Yes. Good morning.
My God, so late already!
I was just thinking
of waking you up.
Yes, yesterday,
I couldn't sleep so...
Oh! Are you hurt?
Are you hurt?
- No.
How is she now?
Temperature is down this morning.
She thinks it's due to
your magic presence.
Oh my! I didn't know
that I had such powers of healing.
There's something
she wants from you.
What?
An autograph.
Have you got a notebook?
No?
Okay, wait.
May I just borrow your pen?
Thank you.
What's your name?
Sairinidhri.
Bulbul.
How are you?
You know everything.
You tell me.
Fine.
Why not?
I feel ass if
there is some void.
I'm missing something.
Really? Why?
I don't suppose we'll meet again.
And you are not
likely to get into films.
No. You live in a different world.
We're out on the streets,
in trams and buses.
If three of my films flop in a row,
I might go back into that world.
Don't say that.
I'm sure you'll stay right where
you are, for a long time yet.
I'm sure you'll have
a huge fan following.
Your interview...
Why did you tear it up?
Will you write from memory?
I'll keep it in my memory.
I'll leave now.
Goodbye.
'The train to Amritsar...'
'At 12:50...'